Feat/access requests (#46)
SolidLabResearch/loama: documentation/access_grants_vs_dsnp.md

# Access Requests and Grants vs Data Space Contract Negotiation Protocol (DSNP)

This document outlines the differences between simple access requests and grants and the data space negotiation protocol for allowing access to certain resources.
It starts by situating the use case and adding extra context, after which the message flow for each of the options is explained.

## Use Case

> We'll be looking into the use case of getting permission such that later we can access the resource using the UMA protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll be looking into the use case of requesting access such that later we can access the resource using the UMA protocol.
```

This resource is managed by a Resource Server (RS).
The Resource Owner (RO) can alter the policies on their resources via the Authorization Server (AS).

> The AS enforces the policies set by the RO when the RP interacts with the RS (possibly through a Client).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The AS enforces the policies set by the RO when the RP interacts with the RS using a UMA compliant Client.
```

This flow is visualized in the graph below.
This document focuses on the message format and flow for the highlighted part of this graph.

<!-- TODO: this visualization is not completely correct and should be updated -->

> ![use case visualization](./use_case.png)

Reviewer: Could you update the figure?

      sotw:requestedAction odrl:read ;
      sotw:requestingParty <https://example.pod.knows.idlab.ugent.be/profile/card#me> ;
      ex:requestStatus ex:requested .
'
```

The AS will see this request, and associate a unique `RequestIdentifier` to it.
This request will now be made available at the `/uma/requests/<encodedRequestIdentifier>` endpoint.

### Step 2: Accept (or deny) the request

The RO might want to check all requests for resources associated to them.
This should through a simple `GET` requests on `/uma/requests`, like the one below.
It is important to provide the correct authorization, as the AS should link this to all requests with targets linked to the RO's resources.

```shell-session
curl --header 'Authorization: https://pod.harrypodder.org/profil/card#me' 'http://localhost:4000/uma/requests'
```

When the RO wants to update the status of a request with id `RequestIdentifier`, they should provide a **PATCH** request to `/uma/request/<encodedRequestIdentifier>`.
This **PATCH** should include a body of format `application/sparql-update`, which uses a **DELETE/INSERT** statement to update the request's status to either `req:accepted` or `req:denied`.

> In our use case, this message should look like this:

Reviewer: Highlight that these are the only triples that can be updated

```shell-session
curl -X PATCH --location 'http://localhost:4000/uma/requests/<encodedRequestIdentifier>' \
--header 'Authorization: https://pod.harrypodder.org/profile/card#me' \
--header 'Content-type: application/sparql-update' \
--data-raw '
PREFIX ex: <https://access.request.org/>
PREFIX sotw: <https://w3id.org/force/sotw#>

DELETE {
    ?request ex:requestStatus ex:requested
} INSERT {
    ?request ex:requestStatus ex:accepted # change to `ex:denied` in order to deny
} WHERE {
    ?request sotw:requestedTarget <http://localhost:3000/resources/resource.txt>
}
'
```

After this, the resource should be accessible for the RP.

## Data Space Contract Negotiation Protocol flow

> This section explains the message flow for the second option: using the [Data Space Contract Negotiation Procotol](https://eclipse-dataspace-protocol-base.github.io/DataspaceProtocol/2025-1-RC4/#negotiation-protocol). Important to note is that this document is not an official W3C Membership consensus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section explains the message flow for the second option: using the [Data Space Contract Negotiation Procotol](https://eclipse-dataspace-protocol-base.github.io/DataspaceProtocol/2025-1-RC4/#negotiation-protocol) (DSCNP). Important to note is that this document is not an official W3C Membership consensus.
```
